You know when you're walking down the street and you see some little thing that makes you wonder why it's so?

I recently found myself in Chicago with some friends on an impromptu (as in, we go to SFO an hour after booking tickets impromptu) trip. Some gap years were wrapping up, and it was the last time we would all be in the same place for a long time, so we decided to be tourists for an extended weekend.

Chicago impressed us. Grand architecture lined clean streets, on which there were so many trees the air smelled so fresh we all commented on it. Though despite its qualities and character, I had a nagging feeling it was almost too perfect. Like a default city, you know? I knew there was more to the city than the downtown, and I wanted to see it (though, the others did not — they are far more sensible than I), so on the last day of my trip I took the L train, southbound.

Gang culture is frequently portrayed in media. It's often glorified, with aspects such as power and violence portrayed as a desired, core part of the culture's identity rather than a survival mechanism born from circumstance. Most people, I mean I think, are not in a gang, and as such, the culture is often discussed removed from its original context. This disconnect makes it easy to trivialize, and by extension, joke about. In of itself this is not inherently bad, but often the parties doing so enjoy the privilege of ignorance, and as such, deminishing/trivialising the challenge such people face. Out of which, memes are born. One such example is Parkway Gardens, a low-income hosing development which outgrew its  being the subject of songs such as King Von's *Took Her To The O* and Chief Keef's *O'Block*. Built in the 50s, it became a cornerstone of African-American community development through its density, affordability, and arguably, its black-owned coop ownership structure.

Directly across east 63rd though, lay Randolph Tower, another dense housing development. It was the home of the Black Disciples. In 2004, Federal prosecutors detailed how the gang "effectively took over a 16-story Chicago Housing Authority building, posting snipers on the roof to protect dealers making as much as $45,000 per day selling crack, cocaine and heroin inside", and how their lookouts were "equipped with night-vision goggles". At its height, the gang was raking in $300k per day, according to the Chicago Tribune. In 2006, the building was demolished. The gang needed a new centre of operations; and right across 63rd sat a dense and gated Parkway Gardens; a perfect heir.

  I know you mad 'cause I smoked your man, left him on the curb
  She started laughin', she say, "Fuck that nigga, he from 63rd"

  I just don’t fuck with 63rd. The street. It ain’t safe up there. That shit ain’t right.
    King Von

As the gang activity migrated to Parkway Gardens in the early oughts, it became the epicentre of Chicago's gun violence, an example of which was Odee Perry, a gang member shot dead by a 'legendary' 17 year old female serial gang assassin known as *K.I.* in 2011. Parkway Gardens colloquially became Odee Block, contracted to O'Block, which is what it is most commonly known as today.

  O'Block, O'Block, O'Block, O'Block, O'Block, O'Block
  Bitch, I'm from O'Block, O'Block, O'Block, O'Block, O'Block, O'Block
    *O'Block*, Chief Keef

O'Block's reputation precedes it to this day, despite a reduction in crime.

I felt weird about treating a struggling neighbourhood as a tourist attraction. I hopped off the Green Line at Garfield, wanting to walk through the area as much as possible.

The streets were lined by trees, largely full of multi-story residential apartment homes, with these beautiful stacked bay windows. The thing that was most surprising to me though, was the amount of empty land.

Why? What is this? Why is almost every corner on this street just grass? As it turns out, it's all land owned by the City.

In the mid 20th century, large numbers of African Americans moved to Chicago from the south -- 60,000 alone between 1940–44. This was, in part, due to the higher number of industrial jobs during the war, along with the wrapping up of farming practices that had kept black people stuck there since the end of slavery. Even before the end of the war though, veterans were returning in need of housing, causing the housing market in the city to tighten.

The incoming wave of black people were limited to tight areas by agreements by the white homeowners to not rent or sell to black people, in an effort to preserve the racial makeup of their neighbourhoods. Overcrowding led to poor (often there was no heating) and dangerous (attempts to heat their homes caused many fires) living conditions for the residents.

Coorporations such as the Home Owners' Loan Corporation which were, of course, run by white people, categorised neighbourhoods such as these dense black neighbourhoods as financially 'hazardous'. Banks would not loan to residents of these areas.

The area I happened to walk thorough is in the splat bang middle of the large red splodge at the top right of this map.

Before the black population rose, the area was predominantly white Irish and German immigrants. Racism was rife. There were frequent riots. This racism is often attributed as the primary reason for the mass exodus of white people from increasingly black areas - so-called *white flight*. Dahleen Glanton once wrote in the *Chicago Tribune* that "Whites left simply because they did not want to live around black people". It's a popular belief. Michelle Obama, who grew up in the area, agrees. Others question whether the reason could have been more financial. Charles Marohn has a good article in *The American Conservative* where he suggests that while racism was a large motive, he also states "I don't think it's that simple. Or that reductive," instead contenting "if I were to reduce things to a single personal motive, it wouldn’t be racism. It would be rational economic decision-making."

Indeed, the very practice of financial institutions drawing red lines around these 'hazardous' neighbourhoods made it a much more financially perilous place to live. It's even the very place where the term *redlining* was coined.

I saw this first-hand when I was walking thorugh the neighbourhood of Washington Park. Previously developed plots lay empty, bought by the city.

It was sad to see. Walking through felt odd. There was an air of desolateness - parks lay empty, the streets were quiet, except for a few. A balaclava-veiled man walked quickly past me with two large bottles of water. Some elderly men sat on their tired-looking porch in deckchairs, silent. I walked past a townhouse with 4 young children on the steps, a 6ft tall chain-link fence separating us. "I like your hair!" one said. I was tuned out, and did not process what she had said. Another repeated; "I like your hair!". And I quickly turned around and hurredly said "thank you", in a strangely strong British accent. They snickered as I walked away, asking each other why "he said it so weird" -- I don't suppose many foreigners are walking down S Prairie Ave that often. I felt bad that I had automatically ignored them at first, so I slowed my walk and tried to be more present as I turned onto 63rd Ave. There was more traffic here - it seemed to be the main road cutting thorugh the neighbourhood. Much of it is underneath the last couple of stops of the Green Line;
